blog: Build Grafana dashboards for Apache SkyWalking -- Native PromQL Support (#587)
apache/skywalking-website: content/blog/2023-03-17-build-grafana-dashboards-for-apache-skywalking-native-promql-support/index.md

---
title: "Build Grafana dashboards for Apache SkyWalking -- Native PromQL Support"
date: 2023-03-16
author: "Kai Wan"

> description: "."

Reviewer: What is this dot?

tags:
- PromQL
- Metric
- Grafana
---

## Background
As an application performance monitoring tool for distributed systems, Apache SkyWalking provides monitoring, tracing, diagnosing capabilities for distributed system in Cloud Native architecture.
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/#what-is-prometheus) is an open-source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit with an active ecosystem.
Especially Prometheus metrics receive widespread support through [exporters and integrations](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exporters/#exporters-and-integrations).

> [PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/#querying-prometheus) as Prometheus Querying Language containing a set of expressions and expose HTTP API to read metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[PromQL](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/#querying-prometheus) as Prometheus Querying Language containing a set of expressions and expose HTTP APIs to read metrics.
```

I think there are multiple APIs?

> SkyWalking is support to ingest Prometheus metrics through [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/integrations/) and through the aggregate calculation of these metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SkyWalking supports to ingest Prometheus metrics through [OpenTelemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/integrations/) and through the aggregate calculation of these metrics
```

to provide a variety of systems monitoring, such as Linux Monitoring and Kubernetes monitoring.
SkyWalking already provides [native UI](https://skywalking.apache.org/docs/main/next/en/ui/readme/) and [GraphQL API](https://skywalking.apache.org/docs/main/next/en/api/query-protocol/) for users.
But as designed to provide wider ecological integration capabilities, since 9.4.0, it provides PromQL Service, the third-party systems or visualization platforms that already support PromQL (such as Grafana),
could obtain metrics through it. SkyWalking users will benefit from it when they integrate with different systems.

## What is PromQL Service in SkyWalking?
PromQL Service is a query engine on the top of SkyWalking native GraphQL query, with additional query stage calculation capabilities powered by Prometheus expressions.

> It can accept PromQL HTTP API requests, parse Prometheus expression, and transform between Prometheus metrics and SkyWalking metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can accept PromQL HTTP API requests, parse Prometheus expressions, and transform between Prometheus metrics and SkyWalking metrics.
```

![PromQL Service architecture](img_1.png#pic_left)

As SkyWalking is fundamentally different from Prometheus in terms of metric classification, format, storage, etc.

> The PromQL Service supported will be a subset of the full PromQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PromQL Service supported will be a subset of the full GraphQL.
```

I thkn your graph has a similar typo.

Author: What I want to express here is the relationship between Prometheus PromQL and SkyWalking PromQL Service

Reviewer: I have a doubt about this. The subset is true, but it is easy to be misguided.
Subset usually indicates we only support parts of it, but mostly, I think we just want to highlight we follow their grammar for SkyWalking metrics query?

## SkyWalking Basic Concepts
Here are some basic concepts and differences from Prometheus that users need to understand in order to use the PromQL service:
Prometheus metrics specify the naming format and structure, the actual metric names and labels are determined by the client provider, and the details are stored.
The user aggregates and calculates the metrics using the expression in PromQL.
Unlike Prometheus, SkyWalking's metric mechanism is built around the following core concepts with a hierarchical structure:
- Layer: represents an abstract framework in computer science, such as Operating System(OS_LINUX layer), Kubernetes(k8s
  layer). This layer would be the owner of different services detected from different technologies. All Layers definitions can be found [here](https://github.com/apache/skywalking/blob/master/oap-server/server-core/src/main/java/org/apache/skywalking/oap/server/core/analysis/Layer.java).
- Service: Represents a set/group of workloads which provides the same behaviors for incoming requests.
- Service Instance: An individual workload in the Service group.
- Endpoint: A path in a service for incoming requests.

> - Process: An operating system process. In some scenarios, a Service Instance is not a process, such as a pod Kubernetes could contain multiple processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Process: An operating system process. In some scenarios, a `service instance` is not a process, such as a pod Kubernetes could contain multiple processes.
```

I think you didn't capitalize the first letter in other parts of the doc. You should consider keeping them consistent.

The metric name and properties (labels) are configured by the SkyWalking OAP server based on the data source as well as OAL and MAL.
SkyWalking provides the ability to down-sampling time series metrics, and generate different time bucket data (minute, hour, day).

The SkyWalking metric stream is as follows:

![SkyWalking metrics stream](img_3.png#pic_left)

> Traffic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Traffic
```

- The metadata of the
  Service/ServiceRelation/Instance/ServiceInstanceRelation/Endpoint/EndpointRelation/Process/ProcessRelation.
  Include names, layers, properties, relations between them, etc.

> Metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Metric
```

- Name: metric name, configuration from OAL and MAL.
- Entity: represents the metrics' belonging and used for the query.
  An Entity will contain the following information depending on the `Scope`：
  Scope represents the metrics level and in query stage represents the Scope catalog,
  Scope catalog provides high-dimension classifications for all scopes as a hierarchy structure.

| Scope                   | Entity Info                            |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Service                 | Service(include layer info)            |
| ServiceInstance         | Service, ServiceInstance               |
| Endpoint                | Service, Endpoint                      |
| ServiceRelation         | Service, DestService                   |
| ServiceInstanceRelation | ServiceInstance, DestServiceInstance   |
| EndpointRelation        | Endpoint, DestEndpoint                 |
| Process                 | Service, ServiceInstance, Process      |
| ProcessRelation         | Process,  ServiceInstance, DestProcess |

> - Value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Value:
```

This style seems different from previous.

1. single value: long.
2. labeled value: text, `label1,value1|label2,value2|...`, such as `L2 aggregation,5000 | L1 aggregation,8000`.

- TimeBucket: the time is accurate to minute, hour, day.

## How to use PromQL Service

### Setup
PromQL Service is enabled by default after v9.4.0, so no additional configuration is required.
The default ports, for example, can be configured by using OAP environment variables:
```text
restHost: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_HOST:0.0.0.0}
restPort: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_PORT:9090}
restContextPath: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_CONTEXT_PATH:/}
restMaxThreads: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_MAX_THREADS:200}
restIdleTimeOut: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_IDLE_TIMEOUT:30000}
restAcceptQueueSize: ${SW_PROMQL_REST_QUEUE_SIZE:0}
```

### Use Prometheus expression

> PromQL is matched metric through the Prometheus expression, a typical Prometheus metric is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PromQL matches metric through the Prometheus expression. Here is a typical Prometheus metric.
```

![Prometheus metric](img_2.png#pic_left)

> For the match, the Prometheus expression is as follows:

Reviewer: These two sentences make me feel a little strange.  We are filtering metrics through this expression. But our metrics should not be 100% same as Prometheus. 

I am thinking how to write this part down.

Reviewer: The flight is taking off, I am going to back on this later today.

> For the match, the Prometheus expression is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match the metric, the Prometheus expression is as follows:
```

![Prometheus expression](img_4.png#pic_left)

> So in the PromQL Service, the expression will be parsed to a metric name and entity info for query, the mapping is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the PromQL Service, these reserved labels would be parsed as the metric name and entity info fields with other labels for the query. The mappings are as follows.
```

| SkyWalking Concepts | Prometheus expression   |
|---------------------|-------------------------|
| Metric name         | Metric name             |
| Layer               | Label<layer>            |
| Service             | Label<service>          |
| ServiceInstance     | Label<service_instance> |
| Endpoint            | Label<endpoint>         |
| ...                 | ...                     |

For example, the following expressions are used to match query metrics: service_cpm, service_instance_cpm, endpoint_cpm

```text

> service_cpm{service='$service', layer='$layer'}

Reviewer: Is it better to use raw value rather than expression(`$service`)?

service_instance_cpm{service='agent::songs', service_instance='agent::songs_instance_1', layer='GENERAL'}

> endpoint_cpm{service='agent::songs', endpoint='GET:/songs', layer='GENERAL'} 

Reviewer: Could you add comments for these expressions to explain the query? And parsed GraphQL for a better understanding.

```

### Typical Query Example 
Using the following services observed by SkyWalking as the example (deployment from [SkyWalking Showcase](https://skywalking.apache.org/docs/skywalking-showcase/next/readme/)),

![Example Services](img_5.png)

> The following examples can be used to query the metadata and metrics from PromQL Service: 

Reviewer: ```
The following examples can be used to query the metadata and metrics of services through PromQL Service.
```

we can quickly create a dashboard for the `General` layer service by importing the dashboard JSON file.

After the Grafana application is deployed, follow the steps below:

### Configure Data Source
First, we need to create a data source:
In the data source config panel, chose `Prometheus` and set the URL to the OAP server address, the default port is `9090`.
Here set the data source name `SkyWalking` in case there are multiple Prometheus data sources.

![datasource.jpg](datasource.jpg)

### Import Dashboard File
1. Create a dashboard folder named `SkyWalking`.

   ![dashboard-folder.jpg](dashboard-folder.jpg)

2. Import the dashboard file into Grafana, there are two ways to get the file:
   1. From [SkyWalking Showcase](https://github.com/apache/skywalking-showcase/tree/main/deploy/platform/config/promql/dashboards).
   2. Go to SkyWaking Demo: [Preview metrics on Grafana](https://skywalking.apache.org/#demo), and export it from the `General Service` dashboard.

   ![dashboard-import.jpg](dashboard-import.jpg)

3. Done! Now we can see the dashboard is working, the services are in the drop-down list and the metrics are displayed on the panels.

   ![dashboard.jpg](dashboard.jpg)

> This is an easy way to build, but need to know how it works if we want to customize it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an easy way to build, but we need to know how it works if we want to customize it.
```

   ```text
   label_values(instance_traffic{layer='$layer', service='$service'}, service_instance)
   ```
   The query expression here not only specifies the `$layer` but also contains the variable `$service`, which is used to correlate with the services for the drop-down list.

5. **$endpoint**

   Same as the `$service` is a query variable that is used to select all endpoints of the service in the drop-down list.

   Query expression:
   ```text
   label_values(endpoint_traffic{layer='$layer', service='$service', keyword='$endpoint_keyword', limit='$endpoint_limit'}, endpoint)
   ```
   The query expression here specifies the `$layer` and '$service' which are used to correlate with the services for the drop-down list. And also
   accept variables `$endpoint_keyword` and `$endpoint_limit` as filtering condition.

6. **$endpoint_keyword**

   A text type variable that the user can input to filter the return value of `$endpoint`.
   
   ![v-endpoint_keyword.jpg](v-endpoint_keyword.jpg)

7. **$endpoint_limit**

   Custom type, which the user can select to limit the maximum number of returned endpoints.

   ![v-endpoint_limit.jpg](v-endpoint_limit.jpg)

#### Panel Configurations

> There several typical metrics panels on this dashboard, let's see how it's configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several typical metrics panels on this dashboard, let's see how it's configured.
```

   the hour/day step metrics values.
4. Set `Legend` to `{{label}}` for show up.

##### Sort Metrics
Select `Time series chart` panel `Service Response Time Percentile` and click `edit`.
![panel-sort-metric.jpg](panel-sort-metric.jpg)
1. Query expression
   ```text
   service_instance_cpm{parent_service='$service', layer='$layer', top_n='10', order='DES'}
   ```
   The expression is used for query the sore metrics under service, so add labels `parent_service` and `layer` for the match.
   Add `top_n='10'` and `order='DES'` filter the result.
   The document for the query can refer to [here](https://skywalking.apache.org/docs/main/next/en/api/promql-service/#sort-metrics).
2. Set `Query options --> Min interval = 1m`, because the metrics min time bucket in SkyWalking is 1m.
3. Set the `Calculation --> Latest*`.
4. Set `Legend` to `{{service_instance}}` for show up.

## Conclusion
In this article, we introduced what is the PromQL Service in SkyWalking and its background.
Detailed how to use PromQL Service and the basic concepts related to SkyWalking, and show how to use PromQL Service to build Grafana dashboards for SkyWalking.

> In the future, will more integration intro by leveraging this protocol, such as CI/CD, HPA(scaling), etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the future, there will be more integrations by leveraging this protocol, such as CI/CD, HPA (scaling), etc.
```
